=head1 NAME

Zonemaster::Engine::Localization - On localization.

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The translation system in Zonemaster is a two-step process, where internal
message tags are first replaced by English strings with argument
placeholders, and a second step where GNU gettext is used to translate the
strings to other languages and fill in the placeholders based on provided data.

All translation files live in the F<share> directory in the
L<Zonemaster::Engine> source directory and all commands described here are
executed from that directory.

=head1 FOR TRANSLATORS

Instructions for translators can be found at
L<https://github.com/zonemaster/zonemaster/blob/develop/docs/internal/maintenance/Instructions-for-translators.md>

=head1 FOR DEVELOPERS

Documentation for developers of Zonemaster test modules can be found at
L<Zonemaster::Engine::TestModuleInterface/Internationalization>.

=head1 FOR MAINTAINERS

In order to make a new translation usable, it must be compiled to C<mo> format
and installed. The first step needs the C<msgfmt> program from the GNU gettext
package to be installed and available in the shell path. As long as it is, it
should be enough to go to the F<share> directory and run C<make>.
This is automatically done when following the release instructions.

For the new translation to actually be installed, the C<mo> file must be added
to the F<MANIFEST> file. At the end of the C<make> run, it should have printed
a list of all the paths that has to be there. Just open F<MANIFEST> in a text
editor, check that all the lines are in there and add any that are missing (if
you just added a new translation, that will be missing, for example).

Once the new translation is compiled and added to F<MANIFEST>, the normal Perl
C<make install> process will install it.
